So we found out that using a request for storing this is not ideal because the request is dead after
sending a response, which alternatives do we have?
Well one alternative would be some kind of global variable. You could use a global variable which you
store in an extra file and which you export from that file and which you then change and that variable
would actually survive your request cycles
but since that variable would be shared across all requests, it would also be shared across all users
and that is exactly where cookies can help us. With cookies we can store data in the browser of a single
user and store data in that browser which is customized to that user which does not affect all the other users
but can be sent with requests to tell us hey I already am authenticated and that is exactly what we
will do here.
So instead of just redirecting here, what we can do is we can set a cookie and we set such a cookie simply
by setting a header.
So we set a header on our response and we set a header here
by first of all defining the name of the header and the name is set cookie indeed,
that is a reserved name which well sets a cookie and then you have the value of that header and the value
for set cookie in its simplest form is simply a key value pair where you define any name you want and any
value you want.
So you could have something like logged in or logged in, makes it easier to read
equals true, this would set a cookie and I can show this to you. If you now save this and you go to the
login page and you click post here or click login, open your developer tools and in the chrome developer
tools, you can go to the application tab and there to cookies
and if you expand this, you should see your current address here and
if you click on that, you will see some cookies.
Now some cookies will be set by third party plugins, chrome extensions and so on
but you will also see logged in and the value true,
you should see that at least and that is the cookie we just set.
Let me zoom out a bit here,
there you see the domain to which it belongs,
the path, when it will expire and this state is in the past because it's a so-called session cookie,
it will basically expire once you close the browser and come back,
you see the size and some other information to which I will come back in a second.
So this cookie is now set
and now this cookie is not only set but the browser by default sends it to the server with every request
we make,
so if I click on products here for example, we go to the network tab,
this is the request which was sent to the products page
and there if we have a look at the headers and we scroll down to the request headers, you see that a cookie
was sent.
The first one comes from an extension but here this is our cookie,
so it was sent to our server and now since we have that, every request will have that cookie attached
to itself and therefore this data is sent with every request
and now we can use that.
Let's start simple, let's say in the get login page here. We can have a look at our headers, let me console
log request get and then you enter the header name which is cookie because remember in the client side
dev tools, you saw that the cookie header was sent with the request and now if you go to the login page
or reload that page if you are on it, I reloaded it a couple of times,
you see this output.
Now we can ignore the first cookie but this is our logged in cookie
and now we could extract that value for example by splitting on the semi-colon and then taking the second
value in that array,
the array index starts at zero so one gives us the second element
and now if I reload this, you see I get logged in true here, you could trim that to remove any excess white
spaces, we could split this again on the equal sign,
this is obviously a very complex way
but if I do this again and then I use the second value, then I should get the true or false value.
So now if I reload this, I get
true here,
so obviously this is a very complex way but should be quite readable
and then I can extract my is logged in information from the incoming request header, I'm getting the
cookie header,
I make sure that I get the second cookie that is sent which happens to be our is logged in cookie.
If you only have one cookie being sent by the way, then make sure you extract the first value,
so whatever or wherever is logged in is located for you, if you only have one cookie, use the first
one with zero,
if you've got multiple ones, use the third one and so on
and then I extract the true value
and now I have that is logged in information which I can pass to isAuthenticated.
And with that on that page, if I now reload it, hey here are our two options in the menu because now we
do enable that again because now we store that information across requests.
So now even if I navigate away to another page or
I don't extract that cookie
yet and I come back to login, there I do extract it and it is always sent with every request,
so it is a cross request data storage.
Still there is a big disadvantage
and do you know which one that is?